Milestone 1.1 : Update the documentation for End-To-End tests and Debug End-To-End wiki page. (#7)
oppia/oppia-web-developer-docs: Hybrid-state.md

## Overview

> Oppia currently uses **Protractor** for end-to-end testing but as the Angular team plans to end the development of Protractor at the end of 2022, we are plannning to migrate all these tests to **WebdriverIO**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oppia currently uses **Protractor** for end-to-end testing, but as the Angular team plans to end the development of Protractor at the end of 2022, we are plannning to migrate all these tests to **WebdriverIO**.
```

Author: Done.

> Till the time the migration will be complete the tests will be present in **Hybrid State**, i.e the tests will be present in both webdriverIO and protractor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As long as the migration is going on, the tests will be present in the **Hybrid State**, i.e the tests will be present in both webdriverIO and protractor.
```

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Resolved

> Till the time the migration will be complete the tests will be present in **Hybrid State**, i.e the tests will be present in both webdriverIO and protractor.

Reviewer: If you want this to be a separate paragraph, you'll need to add a blank line above it. Ditto elsewhere

Author: Done.

There are a few important points about the hybrid state:

> * We will have two tools to run the E2E tests i.e protractor and webdriverIO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We will have two tools to run the E2E tests: protractor and webdriverIO
```

Author: Done.

> * Each test suite will be either present in webdriverIO or protractor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Each test suite will be either present in webdriverIO or protractor, never in both.
```

(if this is true of course)

Author: Done.

> * Same utils files can be present in both webdriverIO and protractor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When a utility file is needed by both a protractor test and a webdriverIO test, we will have two copies of the file: one in webdriverIO and one in protractor.
```

Author: Done.

* No file will contain the code of both webdriverIO and protractor.

* Protractor suite can only work on protractor utils and vice versa for webdriverIO.

## E2E Migration tracker

> The [webdriverio migration tracker](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Mj-llYXMURtis54vpL2VL7BwgRiFIZ1nIFtK3fY3Se4/edit?usp=sharing) holds the record of suites migrated to webdriverIO, suites still in protractor and when I am going to migrate them, dependencies migrated to webdriverIO, dependencies still in protractor, and common dependencies which are present in both protractor and webdriverIO.

Reviewer 2: By saying **"when I am going to migrate them"** are you referring to the start date or the end date. Please be very clear what you are writing so that no one creates false hopes.

Also, I think might you can use a bulleted list here to show what tracker contains.

Author: Updated.

Reviewer 2: Resolved

> Contributors can use this to get the idea about when a test suite is going to be migrated and hence plan their PR accordingly in order to avoid clashes such as if Shivam Jha opened a PR to migrate a particular suite and the contributor also opens a PR making changes in the same suite at the same time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Contributors can use this to get the idea about when a test suite is going to be migrated and hence plan their PR accordingly in order to avoid clashes which have been discussed in Add/Modify E2E tests section (See the edge case in point 2 for more information).
```

Also, please link Add/Modify E2E tests.

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Linking not done.

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Resolved

> ## Add/Modify E2E tests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Add or modify E2E tests
```

Author: Done.

Reviewer: not done (note `Modify` -> `modify`)

Author: Done.

> 1. **If contributor want to add a new suite:**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **If contributor wants to add a new suite:**
```

Author: Done.

* Add the new e2e test suite in webdriverio.

> **Note**: As the first new suite will be added in late August, we will have most of the files already migrated to WebdriverIO like action.js, forms.js, user.js, general.js waitFor.js which are mostly needed for writing a new test.

Reviewer: All the content associated with the `1` should be indented accordingly. Ditto below

Author: Done.

Reviewer: You didn't indent far enough. Please always check the rendered markdown to make sure the formatting is right

Author: Not needed now, as I removed the text from bullets, as per suggestion received from Shahbaz.

> * Add the new e2e test suite in webdriverio.
> **Note**: As the first new suite will be added in late August, we will have most of the files already migrated to WebdriverIO like action.js, forms.js, user.js, general.js waitFor.js which are mostly needed for writing a new test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add the new e2e test suite in webdriverio.

**Note**: By late August when we expect other contributors to start adding new E2E tests, we will have most of the general utility files like action.js, forms.js, user.js, general.js, and waitFor.js already migrated to webdriverIO.
```

Author: Done.

Reviewer: not done

Author: Done, finally.

> 2. **If contributor want to modify a suite** 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **If contributor wants to modify a suite** 
```

Author: Done.

> * If the suite is migrated to webdriverIO then add the tests in webdriverIO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the suite is migrated to webdriverIO then make the changes in webdriverIO.
```

Author: Done.

> * If the suite is still in protractor then add the tests in protractor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the suite is still in protractor then make the changes in protractor.
```

Author: Done.

> **Edge Case**: If Shivam Jha already have a migration PR open for a particular suite and at the same time any other contributor also made a PR adding the tests in the same suite, in this case, if Shivam Jha's PR will be merged first then the contributor needs to write the tests in webdriverIO (contributor can take help from Shivam Jha) otherwise Shivam Jha need to update his PR with the changes.

Reviewer 2: I think you can also mention about how will the other contributors get notified if your PR get's merged first.

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Can you please rephrase it properly? I am taking about the edge case.

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Referring to @U8NWXD's [comment](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-web-developer-docs/pull/7#discussion_r900421297) for this because we both have the same doubt. Hence, it would be good if a common solution is made here.

Author: Removed them, yes they work even without await.

Author: Actually, the comment that you linked is not for the Edge case it's for [this comment](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-web-developer-docs/pull/7#discussion_r900052585)

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I misinterpreted. I needed to put this comment in the below review. Thanks for pointing this out. Resolved

> **Edge Case**: If Shivam Jha already have a migration PR open for a particular suite and at the same time any other contributor also made a PR adding the tests in the same suite, in this case, if Shivam Jha's PR will be merged first then the contributor needs to write the tests in webdriverIO (contributor can take help from Shivam Jha) otherwise Shivam Jha need to update his PR with the changes.

Reviewer: At this point in the wiki, we don't know that "Shivam Jha" is the one doing this migration

Author: Replaced 'Shivam Jha PR' with 'migration PR' here and elsewhere

> **Edge Case**: If Shivam Jha already have a migration PR open for a particular suite and at the same time any other contributor also made a PR adding the tests in the same suite, in this case, if Shivam Jha's PR will be merged first then the contributor needs to write the tests in webdriverIO (contributor can take help from Shivam Jha) otherwise Shivam Jha need to update his PR with the changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Edge Case**: If Shivam Jha already have a migration PR open for a particular suite and at the same time any other contributor also made a PR adding the tests in the same suite, then if Shivam Jha's PR will be merged first, the contributor needs to write the tests in webdriverIO (contributor can take help from Shivam Jha). Otherwise, Shivam Jha needs to update his PR with the changes.
```

Author: Done.

3. **If contributor is planning to make some changes in the common files**

> The tests might break if the changes are only applied in one version of the common file. So we need to make sure to keep the two versions of the common file in sync. We will not merge the PR of the contributor if it's not synced. Contributor can take help from Shivam Jha or the migration guide in order to make the necessary changes for the other version.

Reviewer 2: May be you can link your contact details section in Shivam Jha? Ditto elsewhere.

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Can you please link the migration guide? Also use the original name used for it.

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Resolved

> ####Current Approach to migrate the dependencies

Reviewer 2: This style is not reflected. Can you please cross check?

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Resolved

> ####Current Approach to migrate the dependencies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Current approach to migrate the dependencies
```

Author: Done.

> To reduce the duplicate code in the codebase we are going to migrate only those portions of the dependencies which are used in the suite that we are migrating. The remaining portions will be migrated when other suite which depends upon the same dependencies will be migrated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reduce the duplicate code in the codebase we are going to migrate only those portions of the dependencies which are used in the suite that we are migrating. The remaining portions will be migrated when a suite which depends upon them is migrated.
```

Author: Done.

> Let's understand this situation with a simple test case. We have two test files **AdditonalPlayer** (having dependencies **ExplorationEditorPage**, **ExplorationPlayerPage**, **LibraryPage**), and **AdditonalEditorFeaturesModals** (having dependencies **ExplorationEditorPage**). We can see that the **ExplorationEditorPage** is common in both the test suites. So now we need to migrate the AdditionalPlayer then we will also have to migrate its dependencies, there will be no issue with **ExplorationPlayerPage**, **LibraryPage** as they do not have any suites dependent on them, we will just migrate them and delete their protractor version. But for **ExplorationEditorPage** we still have one dependent suite i.e **AdditonalEditorFeatures** so we will migrate it to successfully migrate out the **AdditionalPlayer** suite but we will not delete the protractor version of it (as a protractor suite cannot work on webdriveriO util files). So now the **ExplorationEditorPage** file will be a common file that presents in both webdriverIO as well as protractor version. To reduce code duplicacy to some extent I will migrate only that portion of ExplorationEditorPage that will be used in the **AdditonalPlayer** suite, rest can be migrated when we will migrate **AdditonalEditorFeaturesModals**.

Reviewer 2: Can you please rephrase it properly?

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: I think this part is still not rephrased properly.

- While migrating AdditionalPlayer we will migrate its dependencies, there will be no issue with ExplorationPlayerPage, LibraryPage as they do not have any other suites dependent on them, we will just migrate them and delete their protractor version. But for ExplorationEditorPage we still have one dependent suite i.e. AdditonalEditorFeatures, so we need to migrate it to successfully migrate AdditionalPlayer suite, but we cannot delete the protractor version (as a protractor suite cannot work on webdriverIO util files).
- So now the ExplorationEditorPage file will be a common file that presents in both webdriverIO and protractor version. To reduce code duplicity to some extent I will migrate only that portion of ExplorationEditorPage that will be used in the AdditonalPlayer suite, rest can be migrated when we will migrate AdditonalEditorFeaturesModals.

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Referring to @U8NWXD's https://github.com/oppia/oppia-web-developer-docs/pull/7#discussion_r900421297 for this because we both have the same doubt. Hence, it would be good if a common solution is made here.

> Let's understand this situation with a simple test case. We have two test files **AdditonalPlayer** (having dependencies **ExplorationEditorPage**, **ExplorationPlayerPage**, **LibraryPage**), and **AdditonalEditorFeaturesModals** (having dependencies **ExplorationEditorPage**). We can see that the **ExplorationEditorPage** is common in both the test suites. So now we need to migrate the AdditionalPlayer then we will also have to migrate its dependencies, there will be no issue with **ExplorationPlayerPage**, **LibraryPage** as they do not have any suites dependent on them, we will just migrate them and delete their protractor version. But for **ExplorationEditorPage** we still have one dependent suite i.e **AdditonalEditorFeatures** so we will migrate it to successfully migrate out the **AdditionalPlayer** suite but we will not delete the protractor version of it (as a protractor suite cannot work on webdriveriO util files). So now the **ExplorationEditorPage** file will be a common file that presents in both webdriverIO as well as protractor version. To reduce code duplicacy to some extent I will migrate only that portion of ExplorationEditorPage that will be used in the **AdditonalPlayer** suite, rest can be migrated when we will migrate **AdditonalEditorFeaturesModals**.

Reviewer: This is a lot of text. Maybe a diagram or bullet points would help?

Author: Updated.

## Overview

Oppia currently uses **Protractor** for end-to-end testing, but as the Angular team plans to end the development of Protractor at the end of 2022, we are planning to migrate all these tests to **WebdriverIO**.

As long as the migration is going on, the tests will be present in the **Hybrid State**, i.e. the tests will be present in both webdriverIO and protractor.

There are a few important points about the hybrid state:

> * We will have two tools to run the E2E tests: protractor and webdriverIO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* We will have two tools to run the E2E tests: protractor and webdriverIO.
```

Author: Done.

* Each test suite will be either present in webdriverIO or protractor, never in both.

* When a utility file is needed by both a protractor test and a webdriverIO test, we will have two copies of the file: one in webdriverIO and one in protractor.

* No file will contain the code of both webdriverIO and protractor.

* Protractor suite can only work on protractor utils and vice versa for webdriverIO.

## E2E Migration tracker

The [webdriverIO migration tracker](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Mj-llYXMURtis54vpL2VL7BwgRiFIZ1nIFtK3fY3Se4/edit?usp=sharing) contains the following details:

* Suites migrated to webdriverIO.

* Suites still in protractor.

* Expected date of migration of protractor suites.

* Dependencies migrated to webdriverIO.

* Dependencies still in protractor.

* List of common dependencies which are present in both protractor and webdriverIO.

> Contributors can use this to get the idea about when a test suite is going to be migrated and hence plan their PR accordingly in order to avoid clashes which have been discussed in Add/Modify E2E tests section (See the edge case in point 2 for more information in next section).

Reviewer 2: Can you please link the Add/Modify E2E tests?

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Resolved

## Add or Modify E2E tests

1. **If contributor wants to add a new suite:**

>   * Add the new e2e test suite in webdriverIO.

Reviewer 2: Do we need a bullet point here?

Author: removed.

Reviewer 2: Resolved

  * If the suite is migrated to webdriverIO then make the changes in webdriverIO.
  
  * If the suite is still in protractor then make the changes in protractor.

    **Edge Case**: If we already have a migration PR open for a particular suite and at the same time any other contributor also made a PR adding the tests in the same suite then, if migration's PR will be merged first, the contributor needs to write the tests in webdriverIO (contributor can take help from [Shivam Jha](#contact)).  Otherwise, migration PR needs to be updated with the changes.

    Also, if migration PR will get merged first then everyone will be notified about it accordingly as migration PR will have the **PR: that requires post-merge sync to the HEAD label.**

3. **If contributor is planning to make some changes in the common files**

   The tests might break if the changes are only applied in one version of the common file. So we need to make sure to keep the two versions of the common file in sync. We will not merge the PR of the contributor if it's not synced. Contributor can take help from [Shivam Jha](#contact) or the migration guide in order to make the necessary changes for the other version.
  

> #### Current approach to migrate the dependencies

Reviewer 2: I think we can have this heading for suites too above,right?

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Not done

Author: Added now

Reviewer 2: I think it's not needed because we already have the e2e migration tracker section lined up above in the hybrid file at the top. WDYT? I will write "Resolved" here after getting your thought too.

Author: Yes, I also think it's not needed. Removed it.

Reviewer 2: Resolved

To reduce the duplicate code in the codebase we are going to migrate only those portions of the dependencies which are used in the suite that we are migrating. The remaining portions will be migrated when a suite which depends upon them is being migrated.

Let's understand this situation with a simple test case.

We have two test files:

|**File**            | **Dependencies**         |
|--------------------|--------------------------|
|AdditonalPlayer     |ExplorationEditorPage, ExplorationPlayerPage, LibraryPage|
|AdditonalEditorFeaturesModals| ExplorationEditorPage |

**Common Files** : ExplorationEditorPage

> * While migrating **AdditionalPlayer** we will migrate its dependencies, there will be no issue with **ExplorationPlayerPage**, **LibraryPage** as they do not have any other suites dependent on them, we will just migrate them and delete their protractor version. But for **ExplorationEditorPage** we still have one dependent suite i.e. **AdditonalEditorFeatures**, so we need to migrate it to successfully migrate **AdditionalPlayer** suite, but we cannot delete the protractor version (as a protractor suite cannot work on webdriverIO util files).

Reviewer: Both of these are run-on sentences

Author: tried to reprhase it one more time.

> * So now the **ExplorationEditorPage** file will be a common file that presents in both webdriverIO and protractor version. To reduce code duplicity to some extent I will migrate only that portion of ExplorationEditorPage that will be used in the **AdditonalPlayer** suite, rest can be migrated when we will migrate **AdditonalEditorFeaturesModals**.

Reviewer: duplicity -> duplication

"duplicity" means "deceitfulness"

Also, you switch to "I" here instead of the "we" you've been using throughout

Author: Updated.

## Table of contents

* [Overview](#overview)
* [E2E Migration tracker](#e2e-migration-tracker)
* [Add or Modify E2E tests](#e2e-migration-tracker)
  * [If contributor wants to add a new suite](#if-contributor-wants-to-add-a-new-suite)
  * [If contributor wants to modify a suite](#if-contributor-wants-to-modify-a-suite)
  * [If contributor wants to make some changes to the common files](#if-contributor-wants-to-make-some-changes-to-the-common-files)
  * [Current approach to migrate the dependencies](#current-approach-to-migrate-the-dependencies)

> * [Contact](#contact)

Reviewer 2: Some of the links not working?

Author: Fixed them.

Reviewer 2: Resolved

* No file will contain the code of both webdriverIO and protractor.

* Protractor suite can only work on protractor utils and vice versa for webdriverIO.

## End-to-End tests migration tracker

The [webdriverIO migration tracker](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Mj-llYXMURtis54vpL2VL7BwgRiFIZ1nIFtK3fY3Se4/edit?usp=sharing) contains the following details:

* Suites migrated to webdriverIO.

* Suites still in protractor.

* Expected date of migration of protractor suites.

* Dependencies migrated to webdriverIO.

* Dependencies still in protractor.

* List of common dependencies which are present in both protractor and webdriverIO.

Contributors can use this to get the idea about when a test suite is going to be migrated and hence plan their PR accordingly in order to avoid clashes which have been discussed in [Add or Modify E2E tests](#add-or-modify-e2e-tests) section (See the [edge case in point 2](#if-contributor-wants-to-modify-a-suite) for more information in next section).

## Add or modify E2E tests

#### If contributor wants to add a new suite

>   Add the new e2e test suite in webdriverIO.

Reviewer: This is unnecessarily indented. Ditto elsewhere

Author: Done.

>   **Note**: As the first new suite will be added in late August, we will have most of the files already migrated to WebdriverIO like action.js, forms.js, user.js, general.js, and waitFor.js which are mostly needed for writing a new test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  **Note**: By late August when we expect other contributors to start adding new E2E tests, we will have most of the general utility files like action.js, forms.js, user.js, general.js, and waitFor.js already migrated to webdriverIO.
```

This is still not done. For reference, I originally requested this change here: https://github.com/oppia/oppia-web-developer-docs/pull/7#discussion_r898715596, but I'm leaving a fresh comment about it for visibility

Author: Actually, it was not getting highlighted, so I thought the comment was just for the line gap. Done now.

Reviewer: For future reference, GitHub only highlights words in the diff when it can figure out a word-level diff. When it can't figure that out, nothing will be highlighted even though there are changes to make

#### If contributor wants to modify a suite

* If the suite is migrated to webdriverIO then make the changes in webdriverIO.
  
* If the suite is still in protractor then make the changes in protractor.

>   **Edge Case**: If we have a migration PR open for a particular suite say _Suite A_ and at the same time any other contributor also made a PR with some changes in _Suite A_ then, we need to sync up the changes of both the PR. So, if migration's PR will be merged first, the contributor needs to make changes in his PR and write the tests in webdriverIO (contributor can take help from [Shivam Jha](#contact)). Otherwise, migration PR needs to be updated with the changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  **Edge Case**: If we have a migration PR open for a particular suite say _Suite A_ and at the same time any other contributor also made a PR with some changes in _Suite A_ then, we need to sync up the changes of both the PR. So, if the migration PR get's merged first, then the other contributor needs to migrate his/her changes to webdriverIO (contributor can take help from [Shivam Jha](#contact)). Otherwise, migration PR needs to be updated with the changes.
```

Author: Done.

Reviewer 2: Resolved

Let's understand this situation with a simple test case.

We have two test files:

|**File**            | **Dependencies**         |
|--------------------|--------------------------|
|AdditonalPlayer     |ExplorationEditorPage, ExplorationPlayerPage, LibraryPage|
|AdditonalEditorFeaturesModals| ExplorationEditorPage |

* First, we will migrate **AdditionalPlayer** and its dependencies **ExplorationPlayerPage**, **LibraryPage**, and **ExplorationEditorPage**. As **ExplorationPlayerPage** and **LibraryPage** doesn't have any suite left that are dependent on them, we will delete their protractor version. But for **ExplorationEditorPage**  we still have one dependent suite i.e. **AdditonalEditorFeatures**, so we cannot delete the protractor version (as a protractor suite cannot work on webdriverIO util files).

* Now we will migrate the **AdditonalPlayer** suite and after its migration, we can delete the protractor version of **ExplorationEditorPage**.

>  **Note**: **ExplorationEditorPage** file will be a common file during the migration phase (presented in both webdriverIO and protractor version). To reduce code duplication to some extent we will only migrate the portion of ExplorationEditorPage that is being used in the **AdditonalPlayer** suite, rest portion can be migrated when we will migrate **AdditonalEditorFeaturesModals**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 **Note**: **ExplorationEditorPage** file will be a common file during the migration phase (presented in both webdriverIO and protractor version). To reduce code duplication to some extent we will only migrate the portion of ExplorationEditorPage that is being used in the **AdditonalPlayer** suite. The remaining portion can be migrated when we migrate **AdditonalEditorFeaturesModals**.
```

This also needs to be indented one more space

Author: Done.
